gh-108590: Improve sqlite3 docs on encoding issues and how to handle those (#108699)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

                 f.write('%s\n' % line)
         con.close()

      .. note::

         If your database contains ``TEXT`` values with invalid Unicode

>          sequences, or encodings incompatible with UTF-8,

Reviewer: What does "invalid Unicode sequences" refer to?  The database should contain bytes, and it seems that these bytes are expected to be valid UTF-8.  There are bytes sequences that are invalid in UTF-8 (but might be valid for other encodings), but if the UTF-8 decoding succeeds, then the resulting sequence of Unicode characters should be ok (unless we are talking about surrogate pairs, some combining characters, or something else that I might be missing).

Author: We're talking about byte sequences that cannot be decoded to valid UTF-8. For example:

```python
>>> b"\x61\x9f".decode("utf-8")
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf-8' codec can't decode byte 0x9f in position 1: invalid start byte
```

      .. versionadded:: 3.7

>       .. seealso:

Author: ```suggestion
      .. seealso::
```

      Use :meth:`executescript` to execute multiple SQL statements.

>       :meth:`!execute` only accepts UTF-8 encoded strings.

Author: @serhiy-storchaka, do you oppose this change?

Author: Never mind, I removed them; the PR now only focuses on the how-to.

Reviewer 2: It is technically incorrect. I am not sure what wording would be better here and whether a special addition is needed at all, because for functions have the same requirement, but it is not documented, and in general you cannot know whether surrogate characters are acceptable until you try.

It is not actually clear to what the note refers. Is it only *sql* or *parameters*? Parameters can contain not only strings, but numbers, bytes and custom data. Strings must be UTF-8 encodable, but bytes can be not only UTF-8 encoded.

Author: *sql* is documented as being a `str` instance; not a `bytes` instance. There is no need to complicate the docs with encoding details here.

         Starting with Python 3.14, :exc:`ProgrammingError` will
         be raised instead.

>       :meth:`!executemany` only accepts UTF-8 encoded strings.

Author: @serhiy-storchaka, ditto

             COMMIT;
         """)

>       :meth:`!executescript` only accepts UTF-8 encoded strings.

Author: @serhiy-storchaka, ditto

instead of a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. _sqlite3-howto-text-factory:

How to create and use text factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` adapts SQLite values with the ``TEXT`` data type
using :class:`str`.
This works well for correctly encoded UTF-8 text, but it will fail for invalid
Unicode sequences and other encodings.
To work around this, you can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`.

> Because of SQLites flexible typing, it is not uncommon to encounter table

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because of SQLite's flexible typing, it is not uncommon to encounter table
```

columns with the ``TEXT`` data type, containing arbitrary data.

> Let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence:

Reviewer 3: Maybe make clear that this isn't necessarily a _recommendation_, just a demonstration:

```suggestion
To demonstrate, let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence:
```

> Let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence:

Reviewer 3: Maybe make clear that this isn't necessarily a _recommendation_, just a demonstration:

```suggestion
To demonstrate, let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence:
```

.. testcode::

   con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   con.executescript("""
       CREATE TABLE test (data TEXT);
       INSERT INTO test VALUES(CAST(X'619F' AS TEXT));
   """)

> To work with such databases, we can use the following trick,

Reviewer 3: "Trick" sounds a _tad_ colloquial here ;)

```suggestion
To work with such databases, we can use the following technique,
```

borrowed from the :ref:`unicode-howto`:

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, errors="surrogateescape")
   dump = con.iterdump()
   for line in dump:
       print(line)

The dump will now print with Unicode surrogate escapes:

.. testoutput::

   BEGIN TRANSACTION;
   CREATE TABLE test (data TEXT);
   INSERT INTO "test" VALUES('a\udc9f');
   COMMIT;

> Notice that in order to write the invalid Unicode sequence to a file,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that in order to write the invalid Unicode sequence to a file,
```

> you must also use ``errors="surrogateescape"`` as an argument to :func:`open`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you will also have to use ``errors="surrogateescape"`` as an argument to :func:`open`:
```

instead of a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. _sqlite3-howto-encoding:

How to handle non-UTF-8 text encodings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` adapts SQLite values with the ``TEXT`` data type
> using :class:`str`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` uses :class:`str` to adapt SQLite values
with the ``TEXT`` data type.
```

I find this phrasing clearer, less ambiguous and easier to follow

Author: Thanks, that reads better.

This works well for UTF-8 encoded text, but it will fail for other encodings

> and invalid UTF-8.

Reviewer: This is understandable and probably ok, but technically you might tweak it to say:
```suggestion
This works well for UTF-8 encoded text, but it might fail for other encodings
and invalid UTF-8.
```
Since e.g. ASCII-encoded text will also work (UTF-8 is ASCII-compatible), or even iso-8859-1-encoded text that contain only ASCII will fail.  IOW, it's not guaranteed that having text encoded with a different encoding will result in a failure.

Author: Thanks, good point.

You can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory` to handle such cases.

> Because of SQLite's `flexible typing`_, it is not uncommon to encounter table
> columns with the ``TEXT`` data type, containing non-UTF-8 encodings,
> or even arbitrary data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of SQLite's `flexible typing`_, it is not uncommon to encounter table
columns with the ``TEXT`` data type containing non-UTF-8 encodings,
or even arbitrary data.
```
Is this comma needed?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, the comma implies the structure is:

> it is not uncommon to encounter table columns ((with the ``TEXT`` data type), (containing non-UTF-8 encodings), (or even arbitrary data)).

But it seems the intended meaning is instead:

> it is not uncommon to encounter table columns with the ``TEXT`` data type ((containing non-UTF-8 encodings), (or even arbitrary data)).

> To demonstrate, let's assume we've got a database with ISO-8859-2 (Latin 2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To demonstrate, let's assume we have a database with ISO-8859-2 (Latin 2)
```

Reviewer 4: Also, conventional spelling of "Latin-2" is with a hyphen:

```suggestion
To demonstrate, let's assume we have a database with ISO-8859-2 (Latin-2)
```

encoded text, for example a table of Czech-English dictionary entries.
Assuming we now have a :class:`Connection` instance :py:data:`!con`
connected to this database,

> we can decode the Latin 2 encoded text using this :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
we can decode the Latin-2 encoded text using this :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`:
```

Minor tweak

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, encoding="latin2")

For invalid UTF-8 or arbitrary data in stored in ``TEXT`` table columns,
you can use the following technique, borrowed from the :ref:`unicode-howto`:

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, errors="surrogateescape")

.. note::

>    Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Strings containing surrogate escapes must be treated with care.
```
Is that a stray `and` or did you want to add something else?

>    Strings containing surrogate escapes must be treated with care.
>    For example, you cannot pass them back to SQLite,
>    since the :mod:`!sqlite3` module API does not support strings
>    containing surrogate escape codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The :mod:`!sqlite3` module API does not support strings
   containing surrogates.
```
I would simply say this then.  This will make the users aware of this limitation without going in too much details, so that they will remove the surrogates and try again.  If there are situations where surrogates are allowed (e.g. can I have them in a db and read them?) then it might be worth to specify that.

Author: The example just above this text shows how to deal with strings w/surrogates in the DB. I think your proposal works swell. Keep it simple 🪄

Author: Alternatively, one could remove this warning and mention this limitation explicitly for each API.

>    containing surrogate escape codes.

Reviewer: The wording of this sentence is a bit off.  You can talk about surrogates if you are talking about the characters themselves.  `surrogateescape` is an error handler that converts surrogates to Unicode characters in a different range, and you also have escape sequences (`'\uXXXX'`) that represent surrogates.

Does "pass them back" imply that you can get them out from the DB?

Author: Hm, yes this is certainly a bit off. The point we want to highlight (IMO) is that strings containing surrogate escape sequences will not be accepted by the `sqlite3` APIs. For example, `Cursor.execute` will not accept strings with surrogate escape sequences neither as the *sql* string, nor as a part of the *parameters* sequence.

Author: Let's unblock this PR by removing this note; we can add a note in a follow-up PR.

instead of a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. _sqlite3-howto-text-factory:

How to create and use text factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` adapts SQLite values with the ``TEXT`` data type
using :class:`str`.
This works well for correctly encoded UTF-8 text, but it will fail for invalid
Unicode sequences and other encodings.
To work around this, you can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`.

Because of SQLite's `flexible typing`_, it is not uncommon to encounter table
columns with the ``TEXT`` data type, containing arbitrary data.
To demonstrate, let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence.
We will use a `CAST expression`_ to coerce an invalid Unicode sequence,
represented as a hexadecimal string ``X'619F'``,
into the ``TEXT`` data type:

.. testcode::

   con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   con.executescript("""
       CREATE TABLE test (data TEXT);

>        INSERT INTO test VALUES(CAST(X'619F' AS TEXT));

Reviewer 2: Are you from Norway? Did you use some historical character encodings different from ISO-8859-1?

I think that you can use more real-world example here. Some Norwegian geographic or personal name containing non-ASCII characters encoded in historical Norwegian character encoding. It is better to use something different from Latin1 and cp1252 because they are used sometimes as default fallback encoding, and we want to show that it is not the case here.

Author: > Are you from Norway?

I am.

> Did you use some historical character encodings different from ISO-8859-1?

Not that I can recall. IIRC, most webpages back in the 90s used ISO-8859-1.

> I think that you can use more real-world example here.

I agree; real-world examples are always better than contrived examples.

> Some Norwegian geographic or personal name containing non-ASCII characters encoded in historical Norwegian character encoding. It is better to use something different from Latin1 and cp1252 because they are used sometimes as default fallback encoding, and we want to show that it is not the case here.

Let's try and find something :)

Author: cc. @corona10 (as mentioned on the Discord chat)

Reviewer: Using a different iso-8859-X (where `X != 1`) might be a good compromise, even though all iso-8859-X encoding can decode any byte sequence without decoding errors (even though the result might be unexpected).

> encoded in historical Norwegian character encoding

I'm not aware of any specific encoding other than `iso-8859-1`.
The Runic Unicode block comes to mind, but afaik that can only be encoded by UTF-* encodings :upside_down_face:), and wouldn't solve the problem at hand.

Reviewer 2: @encukou proposed to use a Czech example with iso-8859-2, and I think a Czech example is perfect here.

Author: I hope the example of 3b9f620aacac66c20344473a218af5d75959736f is sufficient for now. Also note that we can cook up a better example in a later PR.

instead of a :class:`~collections.namedtuple`.

.. _sqlite3-howto-text-factory:

How to create and use text factories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, :mod:`!sqlite3` adapts SQLite values with the ``TEXT`` data type
using :class:`str`.
This works well for correctly encoded UTF-8 text, but it will fail for invalid

> Unicode sequences and other encodings.

Reviewer: Here it should probably just talk about "valid UTF-8" or "text correctly encoded as UTF-8" (note that "UTF-8 text" doesn't really exist since UTF-8 is bytes, and you can't encode UTF-*).

Author: Good point :) I'll reword it tomorrow.

Author: Addressed in 3b9f620aacac66c20344473a218af5d75959736f

> To work around this, you can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`.

Reviewer: Even though defaulting on UTF-8 is technically a limitation, I wouldn't say it's something that needs to be "worked around"
```suggestion
You can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory` to specify different encodings.
```

Author: Yeah, "work around" has a negative touch to it. Perhaps:

```suggestion
You can use a custom :attr:`~Connection.text_factory` to handle such cases.
```

Because of SQLite's `flexible typing`_, it is not uncommon to encounter table
columns with the ``TEXT`` data type, containing arbitrary data.

> To demonstrate, let's create a test database with an invalid Unicode sequence.

Reviewer: Same thing, you want to create a field that contains a byte sequence that is not valid UTF-8 (or that can't be decoded as UTF-8).

Author: Yes, this is poorly worded. I'll suggest a more accurate wording tomorrow.

Author: How does 3b9f620aacac66c20344473a218af5d75959736f look?

We will use a `CAST expression`_ to coerce an invalid Unicode sequence,
represented as a hexadecimal string ``X'619F'``,
into the ``TEXT`` data type:

.. testcode::

   con = sqlite3.connect(":memory:")
   con.executescript("""
       CREATE TABLE test (data TEXT);
       INSERT INTO test VALUES(CAST(X'619F' AS TEXT));
   """)

To work with such databases, we can use the following technique,
borrowed from the :ref:`unicode-howto`:

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, errors="surrogateescape")
   dump = con.iterdump()
   for line in dump:
       print(line)

> The loop above will print the offending line using Unicode surrogate escapes:

Reviewer: "offending" might be a bit harsh if the DB simply uses a different encoding for all the text.  If instead a non-UTF-8 byte sequence managed to sneak in among the rest of the UTF-8 then the term might ok (even though I would be more offended by the code that would have let that happen in the first place).

Maybe it would be useful to address these two cases separately?

Author: > "offending" might be a bit harsh if the DB simply uses a different encoding for all the text.

+1! 😄 

> Maybe it would be useful to address these two cases separately?

Perhaps we only need one of them; I think the case of a different encoding makes for the better example.

Reviewer: Maybe this is something that we could revisit in a separate PR, but I have the feeling that the focus of this howto is to explain how to use a certain API (namely creating/using text factories) rather than solving a real world problem (i.e. how to deal with non-UTF-8 text fields).  IOW, I think it's unlikely that users will come to the docs looking for text factories (i.e. a solution they might not be aware of) -- they will probably come with a decoding error that they can't figure out (i.e. a problem).

The decoding error might have happened for different reasons depending on what exactly it's on those fields, and the way you deal with it also changes:
* for fields that simply use a different encoding, the solution is to use a text factory that decodes the text using the correct encoding;
* for fields that should be using UTF-8 but contain some ill-encoded byte sequence, the solution is to use `surrogateescape` and friends to escape/ignore the invalid bytes.

Since both problems are related to encodings and can be solved with text factories, you could cover both in the same howto, by explaining the "different encoding" scenario and then just adding a paragraph at the end to mention how to use `surrogateescape`.

Author: I reworded the how-to to focus on the problem (encodings) instead of the solution (text factories). I simplified the text (how-to's are not explanations) and tried to cover both cases. How does 3b9f620aacac66c20344473a218af5d75959736f look, Ezio?

entries, :file:`entries.csv`:

.. code-block:: shell

   $ python3
   >>> with open("entries.csv", "w", encoding="latin2") as f:
   ...     f.write("czech,english\n")  # header row
   ...     f.write("položka,entry\n")  # data rows
   ...     f.write("částka,sum\n")
   >>> quit()
   $ sqlite3 dictionary.db
   sqlite> .mode csv
   sqlite> .import entries.csv dict
   sqlite> .quit

:file:`dictionary.db` now contains a database that contains Latin 2 encoded text.
Assuming we now have a :class:`Connection` instance :py:data:`!con`
connected to :file:`dictionary.db`,
we can decode the Latin 2 encoded text using this :attr:`~Connection.text_factory`:

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, encoding="latin2")

For invalid UTF-8 or arbitrary data in stored in ``TEXT`` table columns,
you can use the following technique, borrowed from the :ref:`unicode-howto`:

.. testcode::

   con.text_factory = lambda data: str(data, errors="surrogateescape")

.. note::

   Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.
   You cannot simply pass them back to SQLite,
   for example using :meth:`~Cursor.execute`,

>    since the :mod:`!sqlite3` module APIs only accept UTF-8 encoded strings.

Reviewer 2: UTF-8 encodable strings.

Author: Why do you mean a `str` instance is best described as a "UTF-8 encodable string"? Can you elaborate why "encodable strings" is a better term?

Reviewer 2: Because if it is UTF-8 encoded, it is no longer a `str` object. It is a bytes sequence, which can be represented in Python as `bytes`, bytearray`, etc. The sqlite module APIs do no support them.

Maybe "UTF-8 encodable string" does not sound well, I do not know, but "UTF-8 encoded string" is not correct here.

Author: See https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/108699#discussion_r1314662069 for suggestions.

>    Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.
>    You cannot simply pass them back to SQLite,
>    for example using :meth:`~Cursor.execute`,
>    since the :mod:`!sqlite3` module APIs only accept UTF-8 encoded strings.

Author: @serhiy-storchaka

Alt 1:

```suggestion
   Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.
   You cannot simply pass them back to SQLite.
```

Alt 2:

```suggestion
   Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.
   You cannot simply pass them back to SQLite;
   the :mod:`!sqlite3` module API does not understand
   surrogate escape codes.
```

Other suggestions?

Author: Alt 3: Just remove the note.

Reviewer 2: Better ask @ezio-melotti.

Reviewer 5: My 2 cents
Alt 4:
```suggestion
   Strings containing surrogate escapes must be treated with care as
   modules that attempt to encode them require support for surrogate
   escapes to handle them correctly.
   The :mod:`!sqlite3` module API does not support surrogate escapes
   so these strings cannot be passed back to the :mod:`!sqlite3` module API.
```

Author: ```suggestion
   Strings containing surrogate escapes and must be treated with care.
   For example, you cannot pass them back to SQLite,
   since the :mod:`!sqlite3` module API does not support strings
   containing surrogate escape codes.
```
